# Modules are Interfaces

Let's say I have a big project, and I've been using `List` everywhere. I want to transition a big chunk of the code base over to a new data structure, `SuperList`.

At this point, if I've been accepting `Iter` everywhere possible instead of `List`, this might be very easy. It might require essentially no effort at all! If every use of `List` that I want to switch over happens to only iterate over that list (that is, I'm not indexing into arbitrary parts of the list, slicing it into sublists, etc.), then I might have a trivial job to change this.

This is a benefit of `Iter`, but it doesn't come for free. There are other upsides and other downsides, including:

- Upside: If I see a function that takes only an `Iter` instead of a `List`, I know that it's only iterating over the list (or whatever it's receiving) and not that it's doing other things with it. This might theoretically be valuable, but I'm honestly not sure how. I care a lot about whether or not a function returns `Task`, because it tells me whether the function might behave differnetly depending on state outside the program. That's a major distinction when debugging! But I can't name something similarly valuable for knowing whether I'm just traversing a list versus doing other things with it—other than the benefits to change being discussed, of course.
- Downside: certain changes might be *more* painful. For example, let's say I'm using `Iter` all over the place (which, remember, I need to be in order to get the benefit described earlier), and suddenly I realize the change I want to make is not switching to `SuperList`, but rather taking a sublist of something. Now I can make an implementation that *works* in terms of `Iter`, but in Roc it will almost certainly be astronomically slower than `List.sublist`, which reuses the memory of the original list and dosn't even copy anything.
- Downside: The performance characteristics of an `Iter` are unknowable. If I'm trying to make the body of the function go fast, I may be relying on the assumption that iterating is fast (e.g. because it's iterating over a flat array of adjacent elements), but `Iter` doesn't guarantee that. Technically the function accepts anything that can be iterated over, even if that iteration is slow (e.g. because it's iterating over a tree of elements that are located in such wildly different parts of memory that every step is a cache miss). So a downside here is that it gives something of a false sense of security: I *can* plug in a different data structure, but I don't get much of a hint that it's going to be a lot slower. In contrast, if I'm explicitly converting to a List, I know that's going to be costly.
